Note taking and decision making (#35)
carpentries-incubator/meetings-rse: episodes/note_taking.md

---
title: Note Taking
teaching: 30
exercises: 15
---

:::::: questions

* What information is important to capture during a meeting? 

> * Why are humans the best note takers?

Reviewer: Are we going with "notetaker" or "note taker"? Or is it "Notetaker" (the role) and "note taker" (general descriptive term)?

Do you need to try to type every word that is spoken?
How do you make sure you're capturing the right information? 
To answer this question, it's useful to first focus on what the goal(s) are for having a Notetaker, which are (at least) two-fold: 

- Make a record of decisions that were made, and any significant dissent that was raised.
- Keep track of any follow-up action items (including who is responsible for them and what the deadlines are!). 

Depending on the formality of the meeting (e.g. a Board meeting), you may also have an obligation to provide an official record of the meeting, who attended, and what was discussed and decided.

:::::: callout

## Note Taking in Public

We strongly recommend that note taking for your meetings take place in a document that is accessible to everyone invited to the meeting (for example a shared Google doc). 
If everyone can see notes being taken in real time, the Notetaker will be motivated to actually take notes.
In addition, other participants will be able to help out by adding information that is missed, or correcting a point they made if they notice it being misrepresented in the notes.

::::::::::::::::

> ## Why Your Notetaker Should be a Human
> 
> You may be wondering why you should bother to take notes at all.
> After all, most, if not all, video conferencing systems now enable automated note taking with GenAI tools.
> The makers of these tools claim they can capture conversations, record action items, and circulate meeting notes to participants, without you having to do any of the work!
> Although these tools are becoming more popular, we strongly advise against relying on them, and urge careful consideration before deciding to use them in your meetings at all.
> There are a number of reasons to instead trust your note taking duties to a human, including security and privacy, quality, and usefulness of the resulting notes. 
> 
> ### Security and Privacy
> 
> Although these points have been made in many other venues, it bears repeating that commercially available AI note taking software is a commercial product, built to make money for its creators.
> Depending on the terms of service for a particular platform, this often means that your meeting data, including the whole meeting transcript, is exposed to the company that owns the tool. 
> This can raise significant issues for confidentiality, data ownership, and copyright.
> Enabling AI note-taking agents on your video calls can also lead to situations where meeting transcripts, summaries, or recordings are automatically sent to meeting participants, invitees, or mailing lists - including un-official pre- or post-meeting discussions that may have been "off the record"!
> 
> 
> ### Quality
> 
> Because all AI tools are dependent on their training data, AI note takers often perform more poorly when speakers have accents different from the majority language community used for training.
> In effect, this means that meeting participants who are not native speakers of American or British English will be disadvantaged by many popular AI notetakers.
> The note taking tool may "mishear" a word, phrase, or entire sentence and backfill that information with probabilistic slop.  
> A note taking tool is also likely to make mistakes in capturing technical terms, field-specific jargon, or company internal terminology, and again, will make up filler to compensate.
> A human note taker is more likely to ask questions when they are uncertain about what has been said!
> 
> 
> ### Usefulness
> 
> With the exception of a few very specialised types of meetings, notes should not be a transcript of the meeting.
> Instead, they should be a record that clearly and concisely lays out the important points of conversation, decisions made, and action steps needing follow up.
> An attentive meeting participant is much more capable of extracting meaning from a conversation. 
> Humans are also more likely to correctly identify things like sarcasm, irony, and meaning-laden pauses and therefore to avoid recording a sarcastic comment as a serious decision. 
> Furthermore, if note taking is socialised as a shared responsibility within your meeting group's culture, other participants are more likely to make corrections and clarifications to the notes in real time, when they notice the note taker has missed or misunderstood something. 
> 
> 
> ### Other
> 
> Building expectations around shared note taking responsibilities and norms not only gives you clearer, more actionable notes at the end of your meeting - it also ensures a baseline level of critical engagement during the meeting.
> At the very least, your note taker and backup need to be paying attention, and other meeting participants are likely to be paying enough attention to at least make sure their opinions are accurately captured in the notes!
> 
> 
> :::::::::::::::: callout
> 
> ## AI Notetakers and Accessibility
> 
> Although we do not recommend relying on AI tools for record keeping, that doesn't mean AI notetakers are useless!
> AI notetakers can be useful tools, particularly for Deaf or Hard of Hearing individuals, and for people for whom the meeting language is not their primary language.
> We recommend allowing AI notetakers on a case-by-case basis if requested by a meeting participant for accessibility reasons.  
> 
> :::::::::::::::::::::::::::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Why Your Notetaker Should be a Human

You may be wondering why you should bother to take notes at all.
After all, most, if not all, video conferencing systems now enable automated note taking with GenAI tools.
The makers of these tools claim they can capture conversations, record action items, and circulate meeting notes to participants, without you having to do any of the work!
Although these tools are becoming more popular, we strongly advise against relying on them, and urge careful consideration before deciding to use them in your meetings at all.
There are a number of reasons to instead trust your note taking duties to a human.
Some of the biggest concerns with AI note taking tools are listed below.

* **Security and Privacy**:
    * depending on the terms of service for a particular platform, your meeting data, including the whole meeting transcript, may be exposed to the company that owns the tool. This can raise significant issues for confidentiality, data ownership, and copyright.
    * AI note-taking agents can be configured to automatically send meeting transcripts, summaries, or recordings to participants, invitees, or mailing lists. When these recordings include everything from the beginning to the end of the meeting event on the VC platform, this may lead to the automatically shared summaries including pre- or post-meeting discussions that may have been "off the record"!
* **Quality**:
    * AI tools are dependent on their training data and AI note takers often perform more poorly when speakers have accents different from the majority language community used for training. In effect, this means that meeting participants who are not native speakers of American or British English will be disadvantaged by many popular AI notetakers.
    * The note taking tool may "mishear" a word, phrase, or entire sentence -- especially when it encounters technical terms, field-specific jargon, or company internal terminology -- and backfill that information with probabilistic slop. A human note taker is more likely to ask questions when they are uncertain about what has been said!
* **Usefulness**:
    * An attentive meeting participant is capable of extracting meaning from a conversation, identifying and highlighting key points of discussion, decisions, actions to be taken, etc. Humans are also more likely than an AI tool to correctly identify things like sarcasm, irony, and meaning-laden pauses and therefore to avoid recording a sarcastic comment as a serious decision. 
* **Engagement**:
    * Building expectations around shared note taking responsibilities and norms ensures a baseline level of critical engagement during the meeting. At the very least, your note taker and backup need to be paying attention, and other meeting participants are likely to be paying enough attention to at least make sure their opinions are accurately captured in the notes!

:::::::::::::::: callout

## AI Notetakers and Accessibility

Although we do not recommend relying on AI tools for record keeping, that doesn't mean AI notetakers are useless!
AI notetakers can be useful tools, particularly for Deaf or Hard of Hearing individuals, and for people for whom the meeting language is not their primary language.
We recommend allowing AI notetakers on a case-by-case basis if requested by a meeting participant for accessibility reasons.  

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::
```

I have tried to condense a little. I did remove a couple of points, and recommend that you add some links to further reading if you don't want those lost altogether.

I did remove the first point about usefulness, though, because I have seen AI tools that produce a higher level summary of key points, actions, etc rather than a transcript. That said, my concern then is about whether that summary accurately captured the meeting itself -- without the transcript, can we be sure?

- decisions reached (and vote counts if appropriate),
- what follow-up actions were agreed upon,
- who is responsible for each action item, and
- what the deadline is for their completion.

Action items can either be collected into a list at the bottom of the meeting notes, or called to attention with special formatting (e.g. highlighting).
Either way, they should be quickly findable by someone skimming the notes. 

Additional items that are good to capture in the notes if possible include: 

- major points of opposition or dissent, 
- concerns, cautionary points, or alternative paths forward. 

Meeting notes should also include the date and time of the meeting and a list of participants.
This makes it easier to answer questions later that may arise about who the decision-makers were on a particular issue.
If possible, end your meetings at least 5-10 minutes before the scheduled stop time.
This gives your notetaker time to consolidate the action item list and gives everyone else a few minutes for a bio break before their next meeting.
In our experience, very few people have ever been unhappy about a meeting ending early!

> 

Reviewer: Add a callout here about how to capture comments, links etc shared in the VC chat in the notes?

* Facilitator can ask people not to do it, or to also add their comment to the notes
* Notetaker can copy/paste

Not essential if not making exhaustive notes but sometimes the spoken discussion can be influenced by messages posted to the chat.
